---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/lore/garuda/"}
---

> For the Explorers, no companion is as vital as their Bird. Without it, every delve becomes a far riskier and more uncertain venture. Birds have transformed the art of exploring ruins, so much so that few can even recall a time before these strange creatures became the steadfast guardians of Explorers braving the Great Dark.

# A Brief History of the Garuda
First encountered in a sealed pod orbiting the dead portal of Arakvarat in the year 112, the species commonly known as Garuda, or in everyday talk simply the Birds, has had a major impact on the fate of the human [[Diaspora\|Diaspora]]. These creatures that were strangely similar to the flying animals of old Ardha, seemed to have slept for eons, awaiting discovery. But why? After early missteps, where scientists mistakenly believed the Garuda to be simple animals, researchers learned that the Birds had powers that defied explanation. Later research proved a connection to [[Lore/The Builders\|The Builders]] and it is indeed hypothesised that the Garuda were left behind by [[Lore/The Builders\|the Builders]] as guardians of their legacy. 

During later trials, it was discovered that the Birds proved uniquely resilient to the Blight and could even repel it for short intervals. With these discoveries, the Navigators Guild and other factions across the Diaspora stopped seeing the Garuda as mere curiosities. Instead, they began to view them as partners, vital to humanity's survival and progress in the vast unknown of the Great Dark. Expeditions were soon routinely assisted by Garuda, and with their powers, hitherto undiscovered routes and ruins were uncovered.

Over time, the Garuda have become an integral part of Diaspora culture. Their images decorate walls and temples, and having one at the head of an expedition is considered a blessing, a sign of good luck. Yet, despite their usefulness, the Birds remain a mystery. Why were they sealed away for so long? What are they truly meant for? And most pressing of all - could they be the key to stopping the blight that threatens humanity's future?

# Garuda Batches
Garuda birds are not real animals nor native to Ship City. They are in fact bioengineered artifacts encountered during the exploration of Charted Sphere. Even though there are thousands of Birds in the city today they all originate from different ruin sites. Bird handlers call a group of Birds found in the same ruin a batch, often with the suffix of the actual ruin name. The very first batch was the Arakvarat one. Examples of later ones are Red (Red Garden), Xu (Great Vault of Xu) and Sirra (Caves of Sirra). Birds from the same batch can often (but not always) be identified by common traits such as feather structure, wing span, shape, colour, and patterns.

---

## The Arakvarat Falcon
The first Garuda to awaken from the Arakvarat batch became one of the most legendary Birds in Ship City’s history. Known as Arak, it was a majestic and powerful creature, resembling a falcon in its full splendor. However, when scientists from the Navigators Guild attempted to anesthetize it for a vivisection, disaster struck. Arak awoke with a piercing shriek and unleashed a devastating energy wave, instantly killing a dozen navigators. From that day, the people of the Diaspora learned that the only way to collaborate with the Birds was through respect. The Arakvarat Falcon went on to join several notable expeditions and was eventually gifted to [[NPC's/Ship City/Master Moska\|Master Moska]] upon the founding of the [[Guilds/Explorers Guild\|Explorers Guild]]. Arak still remains at her side, both feared and revered.

---
# The Birds & The City
Birds are a common sight across [[Locations/Ship City/Ship City\|Ship City]], often perched on the shoulders of dignitaries or Explorers, or even flying freely in [[Locations/Ship City/The Chasm/The Chasm\|The Chasm]]. However there is one place more associated with the Garuda than anywhere else and that is the [[Locations/Ship City/The Chasm/Bird Market\|Bird Market]] located in [[Locations/Ship City/The Chasm/The Chasm\|the Chasm]]. Here, bird traders, trainers, speculants, and others mingle around scores of small stalls perched on the steep floor of the surrounding grotto. If you have an inquiry regarding a Bird, this should likely be your first stop.

The three primary factions using the Birds are the [[Guilds/Navigators Guild\|Navigators Guild]], the [[Lore/Coriolites\|Coriolites]], and the [[Guilds/Explorers Guild\|Explorers Guild]]. Each of these utilise Bird scouts that scour [[Locations/Ship City/Ship City\|Ship City]] for the most precious Garuda specimen to give them an extra edge. As the Birds are valued so highly, they are heavily regulated by Guild law, and indeed destroying a Garuda is punishable by the strictest sentence possible: a lifetime of exile to the Habanatum system. Still, a thriving black market surrounds the trade of Birds and there are even reports of Garuda hunters tracking, capturing, and sometimes killing Birds that roam free in the lower parts of the city.

# A Valuable Companion
The Birds are not only essential companions for Explorers, they have also become a fashion symbol for the extremely rich. Being seen with a golden long-tailed Garuda from the Sirra batch, or the purple coat of the very rare Xu batch, is perhaps the ultimate status symbol among the upper strata of [[Locations/Ship City/Ship City\|Ship City]] society. The [[Lore/Coriolites\|Coriolites]] in particular are famous for their penchant for exotic Garuda, the more rare and impractical the specimen, the better. This use of the Birds as mere status symbols is seen as vulgar by Explorers and Navigators alike, who value the Garuda for their special powers and not their hide. Still, the practice continues.

Lesser known is the fact that there are free Birds roaming the lower parts of [[Locations/Ship City/Ship City\|Ship City]]. These avoid people as much as possible, and especially the Garuda Hunters sent out by the [[Black Toad\|Black Toad]] to capture valuable specimens. Where they come from is not known, but it is presumed that they are Birds that have been traded on the black market and somehow escaped their former masters. To make the phenomena even more strange; the free Birds seem to thrive together, in a swarm. This goes against all that is known about the Garuda. Some speculate that the free Birds have developed some kind of distributed mass intelligence, but no one knows for sure.